add troubleshoot-lock-conflicts (#2932)
pingcap/docs: troubleshoot-lock-conflicts.md

---
title: Troubleshoot Lock Conflicts
summary: Learn to analyze and resolve lock conflicts in TiDB.
---

# Troubleshoot Lock Conflicts
 
TiDB supports complete distributed transactions. Starting from v3.0, TiDB provides optimistic transaction mode and pessimistic transaction mode. This document introduces how to troubleshoot and resolve lock conflicts in TiDB.

## Optimistic transaction mode

Transactions in TiDB use two-phase commit (2PC) that includes the Prewrite phase and the Commit phase. The procedure is as follows:

![two-phase commit in the optimistic transaction mode](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-01.png)
 

> For details of Percolator and TiDB’s algorithm of the transactions, see [Google's Percolator](https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub36726).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details of Percolator and TiDB's algorithm of the transactions, see [Google's Percolator](https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub36726).
```

### Prewrite phase (optimistic)
 
In the Prewrite phase, TiDB adds a primary lock and a secondary lock to target keys. If there are lots of requests for adding locks from the clients, TiDB prints an error such as write conflict or `keyislocked` to the log and reports it to the client. Specifically, the following errors related to locks might occur in the Prewrite phase.
 
#### Read-write conflict (optimistic)
 
As the TiDB server receives a read request from a client, it gets a globally unique and increasing timestamp at the physical time as the start_ts of the current transaction. The transaction needs to read the latest data before start_ts, that is, the target key of the latest commit_ts that is smaller than start_ts. When the transaction finds that the target key is locked by another transaction, and it cannot know which phase the other transaction is in, a read-write conflict happens. The diagram is as follows:

![read-write conflict](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-04.png)

> Txn0 completes the Prewrite phase and enters the Commit phase. At this time, Txn1 requests to read the same target key. Txn1 needs to read the target key of the latest commit_ts that is smaller than its start_ts. Because Txn1’s start_ts is smaller than Txn0's lock_ts, Txn1 must wait for the target key's lock to be cleaned, but it hasn’t been done. As a result, Txn1 cannot confirm whether Txn0 has been committed or not. Thus, a read-write conflict between Txn1 and Txn0 happens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Txn0 completes the Prewrite phase and enters the Commit phase. At this time, Txn1 requests to read the same target key. Txn1 needs to read the target key of the latest commit_ts that is smaller than its start_ts. Because Txn1’s start_ts is smaller than Txn0's lock_ts, Txn1 must wait for the target key's lock to be cleared, but it hasn’t been done. As a result, Txn1 cannot confirm whether Txn0 has been committed or not. Thus, a read-write conflict between Txn1 and Txn0 happens.
```

    ![KV-Errors-resolve-optimistic](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-08.png)

    * Through TiDB Server logs

        If among transactions is read-write conflict, the tidb log has below message:

        ```log
        [INFO] [coprocessor.go:743] ["[TIME_COP_PROCESS] resp_time:406.038899ms txnStartTS:416643508703592451 region_id:8297 store_addr:10.8.1.208:20160 backoff_ms:255 backoff_types:[txnLockFast,txnLockFast] kv_process_ms:333 scan_total_write:0 scan_processed_write:0 scan_total_data:0 scan_processed_data:0 scan_total_lock:0 scan_processed_lock:0"]
        ```

        * txnStartTS: The transaction is reading request which start timestamp is start_ts, for example, the start_ts is 416643508703592451
        * backoff_types: If read-write conflict has happened, when the current transaction of reading request will try to backoff. TxnLockFast is one of the backoff types.
        * backoff_ms: This value is the time that the read request transaction attempts to backoff, and the time unit is milliseconds. The message is 255 milliseconds to try to backoff.
        * region_id: Region ID corresponding to the target key of the read request.

> 2. Logs on the TiKV

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Logs of the TiKV server
```

    If among transactions is read-write conflict, the tikv log has below message: 

    ```log
    [ERROR] [endpoint.rs:454] [error-response] [err=""locked primary_lock:7480000000000004D35F6980000000000000010380000000004C788E0380000000004C0748 lock_version: 411402933858205712 key: 7480000000000004D35F7280000000004C0748 lock_ttl: 3008 txn_size: 1""]
    ```

    When the read-write conflict in the TiDB, the read request to target key which has been blocked by the other transaction. These locks include the optimistic transaction mode is uncommit and the pessimistic transaction mode after uncommitted prewrite phase.

    * primary_lock：This value represents the target key is locked by the primary lock.
    * lock_version：This value is the target key is locked by a version of the transaction's start_ts.
    * key：The target key of information.
    * lock_ttl: The lock’s TTL (Time To Live)
    * txn_size：The region of keys counts at which locks in the transaction.

> Treatment suggestions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suggest replacing all "Treatment suggestions" with "Solutions" in this doc.
```

![TiDB pessimistic transaction commit logic](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-05.png)
 
The pessimistic transaction adds ` Acquire Pessimistic Lock ` phase before 2PC, which its logic look at below introduction:

1. (same as the optimistic transaction mode) Receive the request from the client, the current timestamp is this transaction’s start_ts.
2. When the TiDB Server receives an update data request from the client, TiDB Server initiates a pessimistic lock request to TiKV Server, which is persisted to TiKV Server.
3. (same as the optimistic transaction mode) When the client executes commit request, TiDB starts to perform the 2PC mode similar to the optimistic transaction mode. 

![Pessimistic transactions in TiDB](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-06.png)

Relevant details will not be repeated in this section, you can see [The Pessimistic transaction mode](/pessimistic-transaction.md)

### Prewrite Phase

At the transaction pessimistic mode, the commit phase always two-phase commit(2PC). Therefore, the read-write conflict also exists as the optimistic transaction mode.

> #### read-write conflict

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Read-write conflict
```

> ---

Reviewer: Please add this file to TOC.md. @superlzs0476

> title: TiDB Lock Conflict Handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Troubleshoot Lock Conflicts
```

> summary: How to analyze lock conflicts and solutions for that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn to analyze and resolve lock conflicts in TiDB.
```

category: troubleshoot
---

> # TiDB Lock Conflict Handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Troubleshoot Lock Conflicts
```

> TiDB can support complete distributed transactions. As of version of v3.0, TiDB provides optimistic transaction mode and pessimistic transaction mode. This document introduces how to troubleshooting and resolve when TiDB has usually lock conflict.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB supports complete distributed transactions. Starting from v3.0, TiDB provides optimistic transaction mode and pessimistic transaction mode. This document introduces how to troubleshoot and resolve lock conflicts in TiDB.
```

> ## Optimistic Rransaction Mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Optimistic Transaction Mode
```

In the transaction of TiDB which has two-phase commit (2PC) that included the Prewrite phase and the Commit phase. The procedure is as follows:

![two-phase of optimistic transaction mode](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-01.png)
 

> More than details information about Percolator and  TiDB’s algorithm of transaction, see them in [Google's Percolator](https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub36726)。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More details information about Percolator and  TiDB’s algorithm of transaction, see them in [Google's Percolator](https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub36726)。
```

> More than details information about Percolator and  TiDB’s algorithm of transaction, see them in [Google's Percolator](https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub36726)。

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
More than details information about Percolator and TiDB’s algorithm of the transaction, see them in [Google's Percolator](https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub36726)。
```

### Prewrite Pharse
 
As a 2PC of the Prewrite phase, TiDB will add primary lock and secondary lock to target keys. At the too much add locks request from clients, TiDB will feedback such as write conflict or the key has been locked error to the TiDB log and client. There are some details errors and treatment suggestion below a part of introduced.
 
#### Read-write Conflict
 
As TiDB Server receives a read data request from a client, that will get unique of a timestamp is start_ts at the physical time. When the transaction is waiting for reading data of the start_ts that is later than the key of the commit_ts version.  Because the latest transaction knows which is add a lock of the other transactions on this key,  but it doesn't know which is a phase of this transaction between the Prewrite phase and the Commit phase.The procedure is as follows:

![read-write conflict](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-04.png)

> If Txn0 of a transaction has been completed for the Prewrite Phase to the target key, and then which is the status of the Commit Phase right now. At the same time, the Txn1 is reading to the same target key. Txn1 needs to read start_ts which is later than the commit_ts of the latest version of the target key. When the Txn1’s  start_ts is later than the Txn0's lock_ts, the Txn1 must be waiting for the target key 's lock has been cleanup, but it hasn’t done. As a result, The Txn1 can’t confirm the Txn0 has been committed or not. That scene is a read-write conflict between the Txn1 and the Txn0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Txn0 completes the Prewrite phase and enters the Commit phase. At this time, Txn1 requests to read the same target key. Txn1 needs to read the target key of the latest commit_ts that is smaller than its start_ts. Because Txn1’s start_ts is smaller than Txn0's lock_ts, Txn1 must wait for the target key's lock to be cleaned, but it hasn’t been done. As a result, Txn1 cannot confirm whether Txn0 has been committed or not. Thus, a read-write conflict between Txn1 and Txn0 happens.
```
In my understanding, Txn0 means transaction 0. So Txn0 of a transaction -> Txn0

> You can  use two way for analyses to confirm read-write conflict in the TiDB:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can detect the read-write conflict in your TiDB cluster by the following ways:
```

> 1.  Metrics and Logs on the TiDB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Monitoring metrics and Logs of the TiDB server
```

![KV-backoff-txnLockFast-optimistic](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-09.png)
![KV-Errors-resolve-optimistic](/media/troubleshooting-lock-pic-08.png)

* Through TiDB Server logs

If among transactions is read-write conflict, the tidb log has below message: 

      ```log
       [INFO] [coprocessor.go:743] ["[TIME_COP_PROCESS] resp_time:406.038899ms txnStartTS:416643508703592451 region_id:8297 store_addr:10.8.1.208:20160 backoff_ms:255 backoff_types:[txnLockFast,txnLockFast] kv_process_ms:333 scan_total_write:0 scan_processed_write:0 scan_total_data:0 scan_processed_data:0 scan_total_lock:0 scan_processed_lock:0"]
      ```

       * txnStartTS: The transaction is reading request which start timestamp is start_ts, for example, the start_ts is 416643508703592451

>        * txnStartTS: If read-write conflict has happened, when the current transaction of reading request will try to backoff. TxnLockFast is one of the backoff types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       * backoff_types: If read-write conflict has happened, when the current transaction of reading request will try to backoff. TxnLockFast is one of the backoff types.
```

       * backoff_ms: This value is the time that the read request transaction attempts to backoff, and the time unit is milliseconds. The message is 255 milliseconds to try to backoff.
       * region_id: Region ID corresponding to the target key of the read request.

> 1. Logs on the TiKV

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Logs of the TiKV server
```
